
http://www.scientificamerican.com/article/crows-understand-analogies/

Crows can understand analogies. Wow (Ladygina-Kots knew that about parrots ;-).

----

http://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2016/05/how-animals-think/476364/?single_page=true

this is a review of “Are we smart enough to know how smart animals are?” by Frans De Waal.

Early concept – ladder of nature (Aristotle's 'scala naturae') (scientific + moral one, based on domination) : On top G-d, then angels then Humans (Men higher than women & children); animals at lowest rank.

Then came evolution (with a different notion of success), but the 'ladder of nature' still remains as concept (often applied when speaking about cognitive abilities of the lesser ones – animals)

Does the study of how animals think explain our own thinking? Human politics is supposed to be based on 'Theory of mind' – humans can develop a model of how other people think (of people in general for adults) and that is the basis of social behavior. However animals don't seem to have a theory of mind. Still primates are very good at politics (alliance and domination driven). Is their conception different to ours?

“Instead of asking whether we have a better everyday theory of mind, we might wonder whether they have a better everyday theory of politics. “

(I don't know some people seem to be very driven by 'domination and alliance' type of thinking rather than 'theory of mind' like empathy. Can it be that our studies are a bit lacking ?)

“a better way to think about other creatures would be to ask ourselves how different species have developed different kinds of minds to solve different adaptive problems. Children and chimps and crows and octopuses are ultimately so interesting not because they are mini-mes, but because they are aliens—not because they are smart like us, but because they are smart in ways we haven’t even considered “

“Perhaps the combination of scientific research and moral sentiment can point us to a different metaphor for our place in nature. Instead of a ladder, we could invoke the 19th-century naturalist Alexander von Humboldt’s web of life. We humans aren’t precariously balanced on the top rung looking down at the rest. It’s more scientifically accurate, and more morally appealing, to say that we are just one strand in an intricate network of living things. “

---------------------

The book “Are we smart enough to know how smart animals are?” by Frans De Waal

Can apes think ahead, plan for the future, 'mental time travel' ? Examples: Franje – chimpanzee that built a nest for winter out of straw. Saying good bye' (another example of planning) Kuif – chimpanzee would say 'good bye' to her friends before going of to work – to care for an infant in the keepers house.
Still Humans seem to be reluctant to attribute such capabilities to apes – why?

In 20th century science used to 'be skeptical about animal intelligence (reductions to 1) genetically programmed automata; 2) behaviorist reduction to stimulus-response) however 19th century saw great interest (writings of Darwin, Humbold etc).

Problem that we measured all animal behavior by standard of humans (with their version of cognition based on thought and language/body mind dualism). Other animals (like ant colony) may have different approaches – cognition is still needed for information processing: gathering, organizing, distribution (and to adapt to changing conditions)

===

Looking at the world from the viewpoint of the animal (departure from Aristotles 'scala naturae') : Metamorphosis by Kafka (1915) German biologist Uesxkuell – Umwelt the 'self centered' world of the animal – the conditions and objectives that are significant to the species survival.

We can't have the experience of the animal (Wittgenstein) but we can see how the animal solves problems in his world. Example: echolocation of bats – that was discovered by trying to 'step into the bats shoes' – very complex process : “Its auditory cortex evaluates sounds bouncing off objects, then uses this information to calculate its distance to the target as well as the target’s movement and speed. As if this weren’t complex enough, the bat also corrects for its own flight path and distinguishes the echoes of its own vocalizations from those of nearby bats: a form of self-recognition. When insects evolved hearing in order to evade bat detection, some bats responded with “stealth” vocalizations below the hearing level of their prey” - to what extent is this behavior acquired (or innate ?) when the animal grows up (like how birds learn to fly).

Animal Cognition = processing of info on environment, how it is turned into knowledge, and then applied.

By looking at the world considering the animals (Umwelt) they now construct better experiments suited for an animal (Elephant has to move a box to prove his intelligence rather than to pick a stick (he can't effectively manipulate a stick anyway)). Some asian elephants show self-awareness – by recognizing mirror images (tries to remove a patch when looking in the mirror). Chimps can recognize family ties between chimps by matching the face – they can't do that for humans (recognizing humans is a test not suited for chimps)

Says that comparison of animal behavior (kissing, laughing0 with humans is often justified for apes (failure to do so 'hides a pre-Darwinian mindset .. ')

“We obviously attach immense importance to abstract thought and language (a penchant that I am not about to mock while writing a book!), but in the larger scheme of things this is only one way to face the problem of survival. In sheer numbers and biomass, ants and termites may have done a better job than we have, focusing on tight coordination among colony members rather than individual thought. Each society operates like a self-organized mind, albeit one pitter-pattering around on thousands of little feet. There are many ways to process, organize, and spread information, and it is only recently that science has become open-minded enough to treat all these different methods with wonder and amazement rather than dismissal and denial.”

====

Behaviorism reduces animal behavior to learned stimulus / response. It ignores cognition/motivation/emotions – example: the enthusiasm that a dog displays for chasing a ball (this is not conditioned by previous stimulus). Pet rabbits don't do that.

Learning is conditioned to the species (and supposed to be universal) – however an animal learns what it needs to know in order to survive (and each challenge creates a learning opportunities).Behaviorists studies/check for skills often only reinforce what is already there in the animal.

Male Pandas are good at orientation – because they have to find the female quickly for breeding (female is receptive at rare intervals); Female pandas are not good at orientation. Behaviorists don't see this – they assume universality of stimulus response (?) and don't see that learning is adapted to the needs of the animal.

Ignoring emotions also does not work when dealing with chimps
Says often study lack respect for the animal – they are kept at 85% body weight, is that good for tests about learning? Often they test animals under duress. Also controlled test setup is most often about domination (and does not look for spontaneous behavior in the animal).


(Ethology is the scientific .. study of non-human animal behaviour rather than human behaviour and usually with a focus on behaviour under natural conditions, and viewing behaviour as an evolutionarily adaptive trait.) search for species specific characteristics / behavior – (often stereotypical because it is conditioned by anatomy / morphology (form&structure) of the species) . Central question – what is the purpose of a behavior. Things to look for : fixed action patterns (instrinctive behavior); innate releasers (stimulus that trigger specific behavior) ; displacement activities -

Founders Tinbergen & Lorenz. Lorenz = innate behavior patterns must be similar for similar(related) species. Tinberger – designed tests & improved formulations.
Tinbergers four questions -
mechanism/causation- why do aspects of physiology function and how these contribute to behavioral
ontogeny - how does behavior develop over the animals lifetime (many are combination of innate and learned)
Adaptive value – how a behavior contributes to the animals survival
Phylogeny – how did the behavior evolve (is it common with other species?)

Ethology & behavior have in common that they seek minimal explanations without relying too much on the animals state of mind (survival value / functional value was emphasized – instead of cognition).

Often errors in experiments : (Kluger Hans – a horse that could do math, but only when the trainer would hint the horse as to when to stop counting/beating the answer ). Now experiments are designed to exclude this bias (prevent communication between trainer and animal).So this error lead to a more rigorous questioning (a blessing in disguise)

Mirror test (for self awareness): chimpanzees face is marked – when he looks in the mirror he removes the mark. This is understood as prove of self awareness.

Behaviorism was concerned with experimental controls over animals; notion of animal cognition came when influence of behaviorism waned.

Animal culture – animals learn something and pass it to their peers. (example: washing of potatoes in sea water (to make them salty) among macaques of Koshima island (Japan). Could this have been trained by the observer? The keeper says no: you can't feed a female first (before males). Also feeding with potatoes was inland (not by the sea). Also the habit spread from child to mother then onward.

Chimps are able to infer things (dogs can't do that). Example: chimp is shown two boxes one with grapes the other with banana. Then the experimenter eats a banana. Next chimp is released – and it first goes for the box with the grapes (because the banana is already eaten, infers that grapes are still there).

More questioning between the camps:
Daniel Lehrmann – definition of innate as instinct is confusing, often behavior is an interaction between inborn and learned. (ehtologists didn't like that)
John Garcia – rats learn that poisoned food does them no good – even if the effects takes hours to develop. (behaviorist psychologists did not like that – they say that cause and effect must be near for learning to take place) Result: concept of biologically prepared learning – a species learns things required to survive, and does so efficiently (psychologists more open to evolutionary factors).

So that ethology learned from comparative biology that cognition should be tested by designed experiments (Hans Kummer) So that there is a fusion between psychologists and ethology/biologists. (animosity between fields of study can be overcome !)

---
Wolfgang Koehler (1925) – Apes can stack together boxes (or bamboo sticks) to pick up high hanging fruit (after thinking a bit). They also learn this trick and are faster at solving these problem (the second time around). This study of ignored when it was written – notions of animal cognition were not well received (Koehler is supposed to have said that if you saw the behavior yourself then it is not an anecdote – always tried to view his subjects from their own position) (Similar studies by Ladygina-Kohts : Matching to sample paradigm – animal is shown an object and has to retrieve it later from among other objects by memory)

Author observed many situations (like altruism) where chimpanzees perceive another apes problem.
In searching for solutions, the apes know the affordance of objects or actors (how an object can be used) and some problem solving (learning/conditioning here is only an element – cognition has a role too !).

Says cognition narrows down information flow to the relevant parts (and creates new combinations) and helps with the learning process.

Growing number of capabilities are discovered : apes can recognize (human and apes) faces Crows seem to recognize human faces (!). Sheep can recognize their own kind. Paper wasps can within their colony (few individual wasps in a colony – hierarchical society so they must do so). Says that wasps and apes must be employing different techniques/mechanisms for face recognition – but that this behavior has a similar social function)

Homology – traits shared between species due to common ancestor. Analogy – different traits developed independently in separate species (same function but different origin – convergent evolution) (example: child rearing discuss fish and child rearing among mammals, echo location with bats and whales)

Tool making of apes – was discarded because apes make tools to solve problems spontaneously rather prepare them in advance. However that's not quite true – food obtained by use of tools is quite important to the diet – nuts are a fallback food when fruit is not available (need tools to crack them). Chimps learn toolmaking from each other ! Even have toolkits for complex tasks – like collecting honey (five tools!) these tools are prepared well before the task. Cultural differences between chimp colonies – between 15 and 25 tools per colony/community – even have sharpened sticks for hunting and can assemble stone tools.


Orang utans and Bonobos also make tools (but less then chimps) (these are genetically similar to Humans) and …. brown capuchin monkeys to that too (they have tails and are very different from chimps) ! Difference: apes think/plan before acting (seem to have a representation of the problem). Monkeys do it by trial and error – but then learn the right way.

Corvids do tools too – even managed multi staged tasks (like get a large stick by using a small stick,
use large stick to get food) Monkeys have problems with multi stage tasks

Ladygina-Kohts : studies with African gray parrots (people did not think much of birds abilities – because birds don't have a visual cortex). Parrots can be taught to label objects, compare them, tell the color shape or material of objects (!) and even count. Alex the parrot is good at communicating.

(in prior ages psychologists were obsessed with language – the author doubts the role of language in cognition – do we think in words, in what language? (doesn't seem so). Do we think in pictures? What can we learn by means of language – when the interviewees have a tendency to lie? Why do we often search for words – we shouldn't do that if thinking is done with words. Piaget argued that though is independent of language).

Still says animal reactions (labeling/speech) is limited to the here and now – they can't relay things that happened in the past or a death that did not happen to a close animal - and one that they have witnessed (doesn't the second contradict the first ?). Speculates that evolutionary role of language is to communicate events that are do not occur here and now (very useful to warn others of impending danger).

Says elements of communication can be found in other species: Vervet Monkeys have different calls to warn of danger: calls for leopard, eagle or snake. Apes have lots of gestures with different meaning- (some gestures meaning depends on the context) - monkeys don't have that.

Other similarities: FoxP2 – is said to be important for speech – and birdsong. Also the Wernicke area of the brain (important for speech) exists in both humans and apes.

Says apes have a fragmentary understanding of Human speech – but seem to be able to combine this information with other clues (gestures of the speaker, etc).

Study of animal cognition made us aware of animal's limits – and makes it clear where language is special.

===
fMRI studies – can do that with dogs (can train them to sit still and ignore noise – domestic animals) Found that some stimuli activate similar brain areas (pleasure) as in Humans.
===
It appears that some chimps can remember sequence of numbers – they do it generally than most human subjects! So much for always looking down on animals. (some people took this as an affront to human superiority)

Wallace's problem: Darwin says that all traits are utilitarian – only as good as being strictly necessary for survival. Wallace says that is not so with the mind – even people living in the poorest and most primitive conditions have the same brain as all the other humans. Can we assume outstanding specialness of the Human brain (discontinuity) ? however biologists assume continuity between species. Author says there are a number of marked differences (tip of the iceberg) – but lots of continuities/similarities between man and ape. But the humanities always assumed one big defining difference (even when the claims for a defining feature is refuted, we come up with a new claim – examples: going upright, big brains (dolphin and elephant brains are larger), command of language – recursivity of syntax, theory of mind, tool usage,, culture)

On theory of mind : often difficult to tell if a motive comes out of understanding the state of mind of peers or out of empathy. Empathy is common among mammals – but cognitive science is not studying it too much.
Controlled experiments with chimps: one chimp has to guess what tool the other one would need in order to fetch food – and pass the tool over. They did it – they can understand the need of the other chimp. Even capuchin monkeys share food – unless they have seen the other monkey eat just before.
Also small children can understand the needs of desires of the other before they have 'theory of mind'.

Other examples: chimps call out loud when a snake is around – do so more if other chimps are around, In order to warn them.
If chimp is in cage – outside the cage is a banana. The chimp tries to attract attention – first by gesticulation, then if they were not noticed by pounding. (They understand/judge the reactions of others).
Another experiment: chimps pick up hidden food in front of higher ranking chimp – they tend to pick up food that they know was hidden in the absence of the alpha.
Western scrub jays (corvids) do stash food – if another one watched they will re stash it at another location ! (aware of the other ones presence)

So taking another persons perspective is not a uniquely Human thing.

(methodology: impossible to prove positively that animals can't do x; also tests for animal cognition are often of a bad design – put animals to stress, tested by humans (unfamiliar species); in unfamiliar and un-supportive settings, or tested with bad experiment design that proves nothing.

Culture – as learned from each other - was considered to be a uniquely Human trait (in 20th century). When examples of animals learning from each other surfaced then this information was received with hostility (focused on learning mechanism and labeled animal learning as mere imitation).Also defined true imitation was defined to be imitation with comprehension/intent of copying (selectively imitating only what matters)

Tests of imitation behavior in apes were flawed – the chimps were not familiar with the tester; when testing chimps in the presence with a human who raised them things looked very different, sometimes performing better than kids.

Apes also learn games from each other (no reward involved). The author says that the aim is bonding & acting so as to fit in (explains why they only imitate those who they are close to) Others do that too (Monkeys, Dogs, Dolphin, Corvids, Parrots). Wolfs watch each other better than dogs (pack behavior), they don't follow humans.

Says that asking what 'makes us special as humans' is the wrong question ; “Every single species has insights to offer, given that its cognition is the product of the same forces that shaped ours”

Argues that the body has a role in cognition; development of Human cognition is connected to hands , elephant cognition is connected to the trunk (and he has more neurons than us)

Social interaction
Apes have a complicated political system – lots of coalition building, everything is about domination etc. (even the most anti-establishment hippies have their leaders do like the alpha apes)
Female chimps acknowledge which one is the alpha, however males always fight over status. However ascribing motives and deliberate tactics was a no-no when behaviorism ruled.
Defeated Chimps stretch out a hand to supporters – to get their support. The enemies supporters get a hug and a kiss – supposed to neutralize them; Alphas share meet with their supporters – while denying it to detractors. Complexer still – former alpha would support upstart to gain throne, but would remain #2 behind the throne (less stressful position).

Chimps travel in small groups – so members of a traveling party stays in touch by calls. Comparing research on captive animals with field work (both get different aspects of the same whole): in captivity they can test the apes capabilities; observing sizable groups in captivity has benefit of seeing the whole story (while on the field they often disappear – fragmentary story. Still in the wild you get the animal as it is.)

Still they are not only scheming and doing politics – they also help each other occasionally and have compassion. Says our brain complexity comes from having to deal with social complexities. Robin Dunbar : Social brain hypothesis – the larger the group that animals live in, the large the brain.(still there is social and technical intelligence – hard to separate them)

Other examples: Siamang (from gibbon family) – they defend their territory in pairs and sing; if the song is song in high quality – this is a strongly coordinated pair, back off; if not – there is an opportunity here. Baboons or macaques – daughters of high ranking females are of high rank.

Chimps under attack – scream louder if somebody in their audience is outranking their attacker (to draw attention/support) - they are very aware of hierarchical issues.

Attacked monkeys are more likely to beat a weaker member of the attackers family (redirect aggression) – classification by family.
Sea lions know equivalence sets – if A and B are equivalent and B and C are then A and C are too (they do that !). So they know how to categorize the sets.

How do they tell? Rhesus monkeys can tell the dominant one – domination is signaled by grinning (of the dominant one). Can tell so from movies – so they have a concept of rank that applies to unknown individuals. (Also ravens can pick out the more dominant one – were upset about rank reversal).
Chimps were able to identify the zoo director (was ordering the other humans around) and treated him with marked respect.
After a fight of two chimps, there is often intervention by the alpha female – to mediate/reduce tensions (triadic awareness)
Two chimps pulling a box that is too heavy for one (cooperation) (Meredith Crawfard): Even when one of them is not interested, he does it because he knows that his peer will repay him in the future; knows that for cooperation the peer is more likely to share food in the future (don't have to be related for this) (!). (other animals do that too – have to see each other, otherwise they are can't act coordinated)

Wilson(1975) 'Sociobiology' – explains human behavior from animal behavior (was met with resistance).

Burgers zoo – trees with electric wire; Chimps take a long branch and use it a s a ladder (one of them is holding the ladder while the other one climbs). Also Asian elephants can move a log together, in pair (still, needed training – still this level of synchronicity requires the elephant to move from 'I' to 'we” identity).
Humpback whales, orcas, killer whales hunt together – and achieve amazing level of cooperation.
Chimps and monkeys hunt collectively (with role division) and share the prize !

Still researchers like Tomasello assert that only humans can cooperate. (says studies that try to compare childs with apes often have an unequal test setup that favors Humans)

More complicated experiment: multiple chimps have to pull a box in the same direction (from different angles). They manage to cooperate and solve conflicts that hamper the task. Both groups of animals that were very familiar and newly knit groups could do that.

(Still chimps have a bad image (as non cooperating) because they sometimes attack neighboring groups violently – still warfare needs a great deal of cooperation.

Still Humans have hierarchies for solving of complex tasks – whereas animals seem to do individual roles.

Brosnan/DeWall: Monkeys share in a task but get unequal reward – the one that got less is protesting. With apes even the one that got more is protesting – notion of fairness seems to exist.

Cooperation with other species: Cleaner fish – service roaming clients before resident clients. Don't take a bite off the skin of predators – too dangerous.
Eel and trout fish together (!) the eel gets into corals whereas trout is in the open water.

Elephant: the females live in packs (protecting the young); but the male ones also form groups – with its dominant bulls.

---

Concept of time: Hard to tell if animals recall the past and imagine the future – they don't speak about it. But: Elephants do recall a waterhole from long ago – so they do search for it during a drought. Apes need to recall past experience in order to judge if it is save to jump.

Tinklepaugh(1920) : Macaque sees a banana and lettuce leaf each placed under a cup. When he gets access then he reaches for the cup with banana (remembers); And he acts surprised if the banana was swapped underneath with a lettuce leaf /
Chimpanzee Choko would hide an apple in a tire – to keep it from the alphas. Twenty minutes later he got back and got the apple.
Martin Ordas: Chimpanzees remember the same test setup after three years, on repetition they go straight to the result.
Karlin Janmaat: apes return to the same fruit trees (episodic memory – recalls the what, when and where)
Clayton: Westerm scrub jays stash away food – after short interval they would return to check for stashed away worms, after longer intervals they would only return for the nuts (the worms would be no good).
Babb/Crystal: Rats in mazes: if food is not renewed they will not return to the same spot. If chocolate is replaced after long intervals they would re-check after longer intervals.
Still does not answer if the animals are aware of their own personal history. No way to know without language.

What about planning for the future? Tulvig: preparation for future must not be made out of current need – and should prepare for a situation in a different context .
Bonobo Lisala would carry a heavy rock for quite a while, until she got to the place where the nuts are (rock used as anvil to crack nuts); this suggests planning in advance.
Chimp Santiano would stack up rocks in advance so he could throw them at the zoo visitors.
Also Chimps often carry toolkits – raw materials that are turned into tools on the spot, with the opportunity. There is even a test that checks tool preparation.

(Squirrels stash away nuts for the winter- but this is not based on learning, rather it is in-built - triggered by shortening of the day).

Social situations: Alpha chimps get aggressive when a lower ranking male wants to shag someone from his harem. But lower ranking chimps have tricks – display in front of the female and invite her into the woods, the female makes a detour and then they have it. Also chimp aggressors groom their supporters well in advance of a conflict – to check out the support base/alliance. Orang Utans in Sumatra call out in the evening – and inform others of their traveling plans for the other day (!!!)

Hippocampus is involved in planning – it does so in Humans and rats (also for imagining the future (?))

Restraint;
Chimps can restrain themselves: Frans Plooi observes: chimp (A) expects to get banana out of the box – but alpha appears. (A) acts as if nothing happens (so as not to be robbed by alpha). Alpha goes away, - (A) gets back to box. But alpha gets him: he got suspicious) Both show restraint – but animals were supposed to be 'wild' – meaning undisciplined (restraint is another thing that is supposed to be our distinction over animals; free will is based on restraint/inhibition – free will is another of the defining traits.

restraint:= awareness of behavior that can get you in trouble (Phil Kitcher) – but animals do that all the time (chimps, large birds (who stash away food) passed tests for delayed gratification). Restraint/inhibition is an important requirement for morality (question of the origin of morality/free will)

Test for delayed gratification: first a carrot passes by, then a banana, if you skip the carrot then you get the banana (15 seconds later): Capuchin monkeys did get it. Chimps have even more: candies are dropping into a bag, (one every 30 seconds) if you take the bag the candies stop. Chimps can hold out for quite a while ! Crows/ravens too (they stash food and feed their peers – so they have to) Given a been and the fact that they can trade the been for a sausage – they hold out and don't eat the bean right away !

Both kids and animals keep themselves busy while waiting (displacement activities – like scratching your head on a tough question)

Do apes really understand what is going on? Can't prove it- but he says that the apes keep themselves busy during waiting – this indicates 'delayed gratification'..
Experiment with reversal; Chimp Sheba gets to pick two cups with candies; however this cup is given to another ape; Sheba always picks the larger one (can't suppress the urge); but if cups are marked with numbers then Sheba always picked the smaller one (shows she can understand reversal)

Michael Beran: we don't know what the ape is thinking, but we assume that restraint is done in hope to get a better outcome (implies understanding)

so task that require delayed gratification (future planning, episodic memory) speak of consciousness – so either define that these task don't require consciousness or admit that apes have it.

Metacognition (thinking about thinking) – a feature of consciousness Example: contestant is allowed to pick topic – and chooses the most easy one (thought which one is the easy one).
Tolman: rats seem to hesitate before difficult task (uncertainty); Smith: Dolphins tell difference between high/low tone; if they are similar it took them longer.
Hampton: Macaques took a test only if they were confident of their knowledge;
If Chimps (or jays) could watch the experimenter hide food in tubes; they were confident what tube had food in it; without this knowledge they hesitated (were not allowed to guess twice)

2012: Cambridge declaration on consciousness – the evidence seems to indicate that Humans are not the only animals with consciousness (well, the definition of the term is not very clear – there are behaviors that indicate presence of consciousness – and animals do them in some form or another); also human and animal brains/nervous systems are very similar and suggest that.

Robert Hamptom: why do we need consciousness, what is its task? - as we can do a lot of tasks without it.

================

Mirror test of self awareness; Asian elephants do it quite well – have a long history of living with humans (however were not domesticated and kill humans – occasionally) African Elephants are not close with humans: can notice thunderstorm at a distance and adjust their path (listen to infra sound); hard to 'get' the animals reality – they have senses that we don't have. African language can tell human languages apart – don't come near to hostile tribes (!) (very differentiated reaction when sounds are played back on speaker) (Also Magpies do the mirror test (!))

Problems with the mirror test – every animal needs to recognize his body and to set it apart from its surrounding; Bats and dolphins need to understand their own signal (echo location); Monkeys have to – but they don't do the mirror test ! (also cats and dogs, Capuchin Monkeys ignore mirror reflections – so they keep it appart from their own sense of self – without passing the mirror test) ; therefore the mirror test is not an absolute check.

So they think quite differently – Octopus has mini brains in its arms – neurons attached to the suckers (accounts for much of the sensory input); also Octopus and Dolphins don't do the mirror test – maybe its not relevant to them – but an Octopus does play (!) (explores new toys then just plays with them – manipulate the object with no apparent purpose); they also have no social organization…
Camouflage of Mimic octopus is probably based on learning.

Imitation: humpback whales imitate hunting techniques from one whale that found a new trick. Capuchin monkeys pass tricks from mother to daughter. Chimps are very conformist – learn nut cracking from their mothers; they persist even though it takes them till adulthood to get it (!); also have local dialects – in some zoos they emit special grunts for different types of food – these are passed on.
Imitation even cross species boundaries : Rhesus monkeys are quarrelsome, Stumptail monkeys are peaceful; after being together for several months the Rhesus monkeys adopted peace making tricks (!)

Another argument against the mirror test: some animals seem to be calling each other by name – dolphins have unique sound patterns to tell individual dolphins apart; Crows seem to do the same.

Theory of 'Bonding and information based learning says learned behavior is acquired/passed by observation + social connections.

Self awareness might come in gradations
...

Notion of animal cognition had to overcome a lot of resistance; word cognition was regarded as 'to big' for an animal (stemming from behaviorism – they criticize experimental rigor or stand on some principle like that learning is the same in pigeons and apes); Other opposition from humanities (?) try to find features unique/defining to humans (increasingly hard to do) and seem to have a problem with evolutionary continuity. Quotes Hume and interprets him as follows: “The most parsimonious assumption we can make about behavioral and cognitive similarities between related species is that they reflect shared mental processes.”

“Animals learn what they need to learn and have specialized ways of sifting through the massive information around them. They actively seek, collect, and store information. They are often incredibly good at one particular task, such as caching and remembering food items or fooling predators, whereas some species are endowed with the brainpower to tackle a wide array of problems.” species adapt to their environment in many ways “only evolutionary theory can make sense of survival, ecology, anatomy, and cognition all at once.”

“We urgently need a bottom-up view that focuses on the building blocks of cognition.9 This approach will also need to include the emotions—a topic I have barely touched upon but that is close to my heart and is in equal need of attention. Breaking down mental capacities into all of these components may lead to less spectacular headlines, but our theories will be more realistic and informative as a result”

Says since agriculture (domestication of animals) humans regard animals as inferior – in our thought we assume it as given that we are dominating nature; says that makes true empathy hard “True empathy is not self-focused but other-oriented. Instead of making humanity the measure of all things, we need to evaluate other species by what they are. In doing so, I am sure we will discover many magic wells, including some as yet beyond our imagination.” (??)
