

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ubaid_period

Ubaid period (c. 6500–3800 BC)
    - started in the south

----------
J. Makkay. The Origins of the “Temple-Economy” as seen in the Light of Prehistoric Evidence"
DOI: 10.2307/4200170

Gelb and Diakonoff : temple economy was about a third of the whole economy (5000 years ago)
- but it had a big role: the money was 'accumulated, re-invested or utilized through long-distance trade' (unlike private/communal sector)

How and when did the temple get hold of land ownership?

When?
    - Diakonoff: happened during Uruk IV-III; reason: coercion, ideology, sheer force
                 temple estates 'gradually absorbed public or community holdings during the Uruk IV - III'

    - Gibson: reason was "triggered off by the disintegration of the tribal system, combined with
a natural crisis, a shift of population, the violation of the fallow system and the
development of long-distance trade."

    - Jacobsen: surpluses were first produced to provide offerings for community temples, and they knew how to store them.

    - Gelb: land was owned by the community, then with centralized state the crown/temple/nobility grabbed it.

How?
    - Deimel: you can coerce necessary corvee labor when the land is claimed by the temple

    - Others: temple cannot have initiated reinvestment process, you need other pre-existing conditions/institutions(?)

     Gibson says a combination of reasons was the cause:
        - disintegration of tribal system in combination with natural crisis
        - shift of population
        - violation of fallow system (when land is left for one or more vegetative cycles, so that it can regenerate https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fallow ) 
        - long distance trade
       also some places were "so strategic that to avoid conflict they were considered sacred"

    - Jacobsen: surpluses first produced to make religious offerings, then the temple stored these surpluses (then accumulation started?)

    Author: ideology was secondary, subordinate to economic factors.

Why didn't the state gain total control over the economy?

    Continued existence of temples/sanctuaries gave them a priority (over the state) in economic matters
        Temple seems to have been earlier than the state, as a continuation of earlier organisations/systems (when the tribal/communal systems ruled)
        Then came the big break with the tribal system (here kinship plays a big role, unlike with the state). Says a series of crisis triggered the transition towards the state.


What kind of temple economy existed five thousand years ago?

    a. estates owned by the temple, the so-called priestly land (n i g - e n. n a), cultivated by temple personnel;
    b. so-called maintenance fields (kur 6 , kurum) ;
    c. allotment fields (uru 4 -lal) which were leased from time to time;
    d. Temple administrative centres which controlled storage facilities, granaries and workshops and supervised the administration, redistribution and processing of surplus
    e. Offerings brought before the temple/deities as a part of various rites and rituals.

http://www.waterencyclopedia.com/Hy-La/Irrigation-Systems-Ancient.html

When did they start to produce of surpluses? How did they deal with it?
    Umm Dabaghiyah.  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hassuna_culture#Archaic_Hassuna https://de.wikipedia.org/wiki/Umm_Dabaghiyah-Sotto-Kultur
    this was a culture from 6th millenium BC (with pottery and "dry farming" (without irrigation, from rainfall))
    - they found closed complex of storage facilities (so there must have been a surplus)

    They say it is unlikely that land was owned by the temple (or sanctuary) at that time. How did the temple get hold of the surplus?

        - says to keep the temple running and for subsistence of the staff. They may have had religious rites to determine the amount to give.
          (you have an example at the Yarim Tepe site)

        - Very early practice of food offerings (Neolithic in Mesopotamia) so that temple got hold of some of the surplus as part of offerings. 
          But says that's not the main thing.

        - often granaries were under protection of the temple!  
          Catal Hiiyuk - figurines found in granaries (implies a sacral organization was involved/protected the communal granaries!!!)
          Khirbet el-Kera, kTepe Gawra - communal granaries were built in temple compound, says some of the stuff was used for non religious purposes (Ubaid period)
          Bevel rimmed bowls in Mesopotamia

        "These supplies were partly used for the benefit of the community (e.g. in periods of famine), but a large portion was undoubtedly mobilized, mainly through trade, since as we have already pointed out this was the largest amount of commodities which could be freely mobilized. "

         "The temple thus acquired land by the investment of this substantial capital, rather than by legal procedures, sheer force or ideological means."
          ---------------------------------

---

Egypt - digging/repair of canals was the duty of the Pharao - first duty for a provincial governor.
    - used to flood the land, while the Nile was high

Mesopotamia - Trigris & Euphrates covers more silt than the Nile! The rivers change their course more often and rise faster!
    "Over the centuries, the agriculture of Mesopotamia began to decay because of the salt in the alluvial soil. Then, in 1258, the Mongols conquered Mesopotamia and destroyed the irrigation systems."


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pre-Pottery_Neolithic


----------

    they invented pottery some 6500BC - that makes dating easier
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ancient_Egyptian_pottery
https://handwiki.org/wiki/Engineering:Ancient%20Egyptian%20pottery

Ceramics/Pottery - stuff for consumption, but also as grave goods.

    Nile clay - you fetch the clay from the river Nile. (or irrigation canals coming from the Nile)
        - high silicon content and high iron oxide content
            - turns red or brown when fired, unfired: from grey to black
        - used for household or ritual purposes

    Marl clay - you mine the clay from limestone deposits (a bit away from the Nile, in the desert)
        - lower silicon content and more calcium
            - cream or white when fired. Fire >1000C gives olive green color.
        - 'principally used for storage and prestige objects like figural vessels'

Each time had its own type of decorations, different motifs in the paintings.

They get the clay to the workship, it often dried into a lump. Need to add water if you want to shape it.
Then you have to prepare the clay
    - remove small stones and impurities: (dry & crush, clean it with a sieve) or elutrication (put it into the water, skim the fine clay off the top)
    - soften the clay (tread on it, so to make it softer)

    - now you can add supplements - temper, this makes it "more malleable and stable during production, and also more porous, which made it easier to dry, bake, and use the finished vessel."

    - now you have lots of air bubble in the clay; if you put that into the oven then the air bubbles heat up and your art project explodes.
      You need to knead it, so as to remove the air bubbles. "In this process, two halves of a lump of clay were beaten against one another with significant force"

Now you get started: need to shape the clay
    - hand shaping (used from pre-dynastic period to old kingdom)

        - Free modelling by kneading and pulling (oldest technique) (you see pressure marks where pieces of clay have been joined)
        - coiling: you make thin sheets of clay, and stack these sheets up https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Coiling_(pottery)
        - weaving the stripes of clay. (if it breaks up then you get rectangular pieces)

    - rotating pilaster/pedestal - the result looks more symmetric, you get something with a more narrow opening.
    
    - slow potter wheels, turns around a central axis. You turn the wheel with one hand, and shape the vessel with the other.
        - invented in the fourth dynasty (2613BC - 2494BC - the "golden age" of egypt, when they build the pyramids)
          You also get mass production - "It enabled standardisation and the rapid production of finished vessels."

    - fast potter wheel : you turn it with the foot (get that in the new kingdom - 1550BC - eighteenth dynasty)

    - Mold
        used for things like open baking pans: you can put the clay in a mold out of wood.

Post processing
     - can polish it now, that it is still damp (rubbing without applying slight pressure)
        - jugs between old kingdom to middle kingdom

Drying 
    water from clay must evaporates, but take that the vessel doesn't shrink!
    - leave it under the sun, put it in the shade in the summer
    - can take several days, even after that some 3-5% water remain! these have to get out during subsequent firing. (if you don't do that then it the vapor turns to steam and your art project explodes during firing) 
    - at this stage you can decorate it, make incisions or impressions. "when the clay was still damp enough that it would not break in the process, but was dry enough that no raised areas would be left in the incisions."
      
    - now is the time to finish the base. 
        - by hand - until the seventeenth dynasty (until Hyksos intermediate period)
        - later they used a potters wheel - and you see rotation marks on the base.


Firing : once it is dry you can put it into a fire: heat it up slowly, so that remaining moisture gets out.

    lots of tricks here:
        - earliest: open fire/pit fire; put the wood into the pot and burn it in an open fire. (little control over oxydation)
            "Pots fired in a firing pit often have a black upper rim" the black is carbon that comes from the smoke (but there are lots of tricks here, to get that consistently)

    you can do more complicated stuff with a kiln (special oven)
        - if you put in little oxygen then the resulting pots looks gray or dark brown color (because of lots of carbon monoxide and you get brown black iron oxide)
        - if you put lots of oxygen you get red or red brown pots

    The kilns get more complicated if you separate the fire from the ceramics/pots. (this is called grating)     


Classification systems for Egyptian pottery:
    Vienna system (1980)
    Seriation system (1899)

----------

Ogres have layers - onions have layers, Ogres have layers - onions have layers
 
    https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-FtCTW2rVFM&t=37s

-------------

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7DwmrQr11eo

Domestication of dogs

self domestication - less aggressive wolfs with more docile genes can stay longer around people. Maybe wolfs self selected for this trait - outcast wolfs hang around human camps, then they become proto-wolfs

symbiotic mutualism - wolfs and humans are similar  
    - hunt the same animals
    - life in the same environment 
    - both have complex social groups.
        - both have hierarchies
        - communicate between each other
        - hunt cooperatively
So wolfs and humans come into a lot of contact while hunting (either humans come first or wolfs come first).
Maybe wolfs and humans started to cooperate while hunting! 
    -wolfs eating the bones after us, so they start to get close to humans
    -humans study how wolfs hunt: like wearing wolf pelts to get closer to bison groups (indians do that)


Artificial selection: Humans breed and select for traits in animals 
    - ? humans were trapping & keeping them captive - to get their furs for clothes. 

Pet wolf (Pinocchio)
    - people adopted wild wolf (?) 
      problem: have to constantly train them, takes a lot of time


How long does domestication take?
    - Dmitry Belyaye managed to domesticate foxes in thirty generations!


Dogs come from 20.000 years ago (genetic dating)
    - that was a  Pleistocene Period wolf (now extinct) - the ancestor of dog and gray wolf.

-------

https://www.nationalgeographic.com/animals/article/130302-dog-domestic-evolution-science-wolf-wolves-human

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7DwmrQr11eo
    Ethnocynology - study of dogs in human cultural context (through history)

    Why do we have dogs? Lots of theories:
        - self domestication/flight distance : wolf with less docile genes were less fearful of humans, could stay around humans longer!
          generations of wolfs did that, may have started with outcast wolfs, who don't hunt with the wolf pack, so they hang around human camps.

        - symbiotic mutualism hypothesis; wolfs and humans are sort of like equal - both in the same environment, and hunt similar animals.
          wolfs and humans have similar societies - hunt cooperatively, have hierarchy, communicate with each others...
          So they competed for the same kills...
          So some wolfs learned to hang out with humans and wait for the what remains of the kill...
          Also humans learned how wolf hunt, put on wolf skins and do the same.
        
        - artificial selection/captive wolf hypothesis: maybe human trapped wolfs, and tied them to a tree, so they can kill them and get their fur and eat them.
          (kind of a refrigerator)

        - Pinochio hypothesis: pet wolfs - take wolfs and train them to protect your camp. (says may not have been the first step...)

    how long did domestication happen?
        - siberian fox experiment, you can take foxes and domesticate them in thirty generations!
          probably took longer with real dogs and wolfs.
          
    Probably took a long time, so multiple answers may be true...            
        - lots of dog sculls found that are in between dogs and wolfs
            - 36000 years ago?
        - genetic studies date the dog some 20000 years ago


https://www.britannica.com/topic/hydraulic-civilization
        Karl Wittfogel is the author
        Hydraulic civilization := culture with agriculture that requires large scale government managed waterworks
        
        "herever irrigation required substantial and centralized control, government representatives monopolized political power and dominated the economy, resulting in an absolutist managerial state"
        "The forced labour for irrigation projects was directed by the bureaucratic network"


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ubaid_period
 6500–3800 BC   
    - earliest period is in south Mesopotamia (southern Iraq) (6500-3800)
    - In the north from 5300-4300BC

    Ubaid 0  : 6500–5400 BC
    Ubaid 1  : 5400–4700 BC  Agriculture in southern M. (thanks to high water table) City of Eridu
    Ubaid 2  : 4800–4500 BC  Ceramics, Major canal system, big settlements
    Ubaid 3  : 5300–4700 BC. different style of cermamics (at Tel-Ubaid site)
    Ubaid 4  : 4700–4200 BC  Eridu temple https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eridu#/media/File:Eridu_temple_7.png


increasingly polarised social stratification and decreasing egalitarianism (from grave goods)
(lots of theories why)

Settlements
    - didn't have walls! big deal!
    - mud brick houses with multiple rooms
    - "centralized large sites of more than 10 hectares surrounded by smaller village sites of less than 1 hectare."
    - specialization "specialised craftspeople, potters, weavers and metalworkers, although the bulk of the population were agricultural labourers, farmers and seasonal pastoralists."


https://belleten.gov.tr/tam-metin/61/eng
The Ubaid Period In The Urbanisation Process; The Birth Of Urbanism In The Near East (5500-3800 B.C.) by Alev Erarslan

    "complex economy that consists of technological development and a high-degree of specialisation, public structures in administrative quality, social stratification and long-distance exchange"

    Temples in Eridu, Uruk and Tell Uqair, Tepe Gawra "They are standart in plan—tripartite plan—and share same architectural features. The presence of temples indicates to the leaders that were mobilised both labor force in the construction of these structures and had a control over the movement of surplus["

Stratification
    large granaries  "demonstrate that the existence of leaders who had control over the agricultural surplus"

    "The central accumulation and distribution of large amounts of subsistence goods requires institutions of political control and thus, redistributive institutions such as temples emerge"

    no apparatus of government was detected, was this all due to "ritual mobilisation" ?

    Layout of temple at Tepe Gawra (north) was different they say this attests to more varied activity. Also seals were found - that attest to someone who is in charge! "Such a system, where the temple evolves into an economic institution that was responsible of circulation of goods and the labor force, a centralised system within the temple that represents a political institution administering to religious, political and economic affairs, has been called as “Temple Economy” by A. Deimel"

    In parallel to the temple: authority of chieftains with decision making authority (with his influential family/group of families)
    They often find a big structure in a central location - the chieftains house.
    here they find "clay tokens of various shapes and sizes in pottery vessels—which were used for accounting function—clay proto-tablets and the status objects like the unique beakers, marble mace heads, marble vessels, palettes and special gypsum items" !!!

Specialization
    Pottery
        - uniform decoration style
        - late period: had slow wheel (would imply standardization of production/mass production/full specialization)
        - burnt at 1050-1150C at reduced oxygen (would imply a kiln!)a
        - standardized sizes in late period!

    Mining in nothern regions
        - Değirmentepe - copper mines in south Taurus mountains. also had smelting/processing, smelted at 1200C (!!)
        - Tepe Gawra level XII, craft tools for obsidian tools (obsidian - volcanic glass)
    Weaving, production of stone tools
        - Tepe Gawra level XII - dedicated workshop rooms (presence of tools in these rooms)
        - Abu Husain - dedicated workshop houses

    What is missing? Prestige object production for elites or exotic materials obtained through trade.

Trade
    traded goods: ceramics, metals, textiles

        - Değirmentepe - "Large-scale industrial metal production ... suggesting production completely directed for trade"
        - Tepe Gawra levels XIII-XII, Tell Abada, Abu Husaini  - imported goods such as copper, gold, lapis lazuli and obsidian 
        - Tepe Gawra level XI - weaving for exports suggested by presence of lots of tools like looms, spindles, etc
        - Değirmentepe - lots of stone tool production (for export)

        Seals
            - numerous seals and sealings uncovered in all settlements indicate the existence of a recording system related to widespread metal commercial trade
            - Değirmentepe, Tepe Gawra XIII - lots of seal impressions

Social stratification
    some buildings larger than others, and with different artifacts found inside (buildings outside of the administrator family)

    In nothern region: first mass produced standard sized bowls - for food distribution to workers.

    However few evidence of social ranks from differences in grave gifts.

Conclusion
    "With this period, the first signs of nascent changes towards urbanism such as political and economic centralisation based on the control over products and labor, reckoning system that was tied to the development of the redistributive economy, socio-economic hierarchy, complex economy and organised trade have begun to burgeon."
    Still more simple than what comes next: it was the "Proto-Urban Period that is the incipent period that paved the way for the first true cities and urban societies"
http://www.columbia.edu/itc/anthropology/v3922/pdfs/stein_gil.pdf

    Economy Ritual and power in Ubaid Mesopotamia

https://www.thoughtco.com/clay-tokens-mesopotamian-writing-171673    


https://www.jstor.org/stable/pdf/528222.pdf
 THE RELATION OF JEWISH TO BABYLONIAN LAW


---------------------------------------------

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bond_event#List

No |Time  |Time G(AD, BC) |Gap from previous event|Notes

0	≈ −0.5 ka	≈ 1500 AD	900 years	See Little Ice Age[12] (The Mongolian empire dies, lots of antisemitism in Europe - they are blaming it on the Jews, Nasty witch hunts)
1	≈ −1.4 ka	≈ 600 AD	1400 years	See Migration Period[12] and Late Antique Little Ice Age (the Western roman empire has a hard time and dies)
2	≈ −2.8 ka	≈ 800 BC	1400 years	See Iron Age Cold Epoch
3	≈ −4.2 ka	≈ 2200 BC	1700 years	See 4.2-kiloyear event; collapse of the Akkadian Empire and the end of the Egyptian Old Kingdom.[13][14]
4	≈ −5.9 ka	≈ 3900 BC	2300 years	Sahara desert reforms by 3500–3000 BC, ending Neolithic Subpluvial. Early Bronze Age begins ~3300 BC.
5	≈ −8.2 ka	≈ 6200 BC	1200 years	See 8.2-kiloyear event
6	≈ −9.4 ka	≈ 7400 BC	1100 years	Erdalen event of glacier activity in Norway,[15] as well as a cold event in China.[16]
7	≈ −10.3 ka	≈ 8300 BC	800 years	
8	≈ −11.1 ka	≈ 9100 BC	---	Transition from the Younger Dryas to the Boreal.[17]

------

https://umaine.edu/news/blog/2016/02/05/climate-change-and-the-rise-of-the-mongol-empire/

"The researchers also suggest that the southward expansion of the grasslands in response to colder, wetter conditions beginning in the late A.D. 1100s helped provide food for the horses that the cavalry relied on for transportation across the Eurasian deserts."

?? maybe that was local, 1100 was the warm period in Europe... 

-----------

https://historyofinformation.com/detail.php?entryid=2811

The Behistun Inscription, the "Rosetta Stone" of Cuneiform Script


-------
Relevant songs (but i am not sure if they are very educational...)

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1riHV-aLO8Q

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CXNPuwNbJBc

https://m.teksti-pesenok.pro/4/GrOb/tekst-pesni-Pulya-dura

Stray bullet teach me how to live
Kind stone, teach me how to swim

Humanism spawned genocide
Justice gave us the Tribunal
Deviations created the law
That What we sow, and that what we are reaping

Stray bullet teach me how to live
Agitator teach me to think

Give them their supper give them their bread
Give them your liver give them your brain
Give them your hunger Give them your fear
Do not wait until they come after you

Stray bullet teach me how to live
Atheist - teach me believing

Who would believe me if I was alive
Who would believe me if I was sober
Who would believe me if I was right
And who would have heard me if I was smart

Stray bullet teach teach me how to live
Gaol teach me to be free

Bullet-fool teach me how to live
Bullet-fool teach me how to live
Bullet-fool teach me how to live
Bullet-fool teach me how to live

---------------

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=q3hMA76mBGE

"Great Nations Of Europe"
Randy Newman

The Great Nations of Europe
Had gathered on the shore
They'd conquered what was behind them
And now they wanted more
So they looked to the mighty ocean
And took to the western sea
The great nations of Europe in the sixteenth century

Hide your wives and daughters
Hide the groceries too
Great nations of Europe coming through

The Grand Canary Islands
First land to which they came
They slaughtered all the canaries
Which gave the land its name
There were natives there called Guanches
Guanches by the score
Bullets, disease, the Portugese, and they weren't there anymore
Now they're gone, they're gone, they're really gone
You've never seen anyone so gone
They're a picture in a museum
Some lines written in a book
But you won't find a live one no matter where you look

Hide your wives and daughters
Hide the groceries too
Great nations of Europe coming through

Columbus sailed for India
Found Salvador instead
He shook hands with some Indians and soon they all were dead
They got TB and typhoid and athlete's foot
Diptheria and the flu
Excuse me - Great nations coming through

Balboa found the pacific
And on the trail one day
He met some friendly Indians
Whom he was told were gay
So he had them torn apart by dogs on religious grounds they say
The great nations of Europe were quite holy in their way

Now they're gone, they're gone, they're really gone
You've never seen anyone so gone
Some bones hidden in a canyon
Some paintings in a cave
There's no use trying to save them
There's nothing left to save

Hide your wives and daughters
Hide your sons as well
With the great nations of Europe you never can tell

From where you and I are standing
At the end of a century
Europes have sprung up everyone as even I can see
But there on the horizon as a possiblity
Some bug from out of Africa might come for you and me
Destroying everything in its path
From sea to shining sea
Like the great nations of Europe
In the sixteenth century

